Geospatial data analysis has been around for quite a while,
but is becoming more prevalent and mainstream due to GIS or
Geospatial Information Systems being baked
directly into more traditional software like Postgres,
Tableau, or Google BigQuery.
Utilizing geospatial data is beneficial for product managers in terms of
making decisions on where something should be built or launched in terms of location,
and how product adoption,
especially for B2C products,
spreads throughout regions, whether it's through
particular nodes or in a more centralized manner.
So what do you even need to start analyzing geospatial data.
At the fundamental level,
you will need geospatial coordinates,
also known as X or Y coordinates,
or the longitude and latitude.
Here's what latitude and longitude looks like as coordinates.
Precision matters depending on the type of analysis.
The more decimal points you have in your coordinates,
the more targeted they will be.
Some common types of maps you may have to leverage as
a product manager to make decisions are density maps.
Density maps, or also known as heat maps,
show where the largest and smallest concentrations in activity are on a map.
Density maps are colored according to a scale depending on value intensity.
It's best to only have two colors and have white represents
smaller values to create a binary-intuitive visualization.
To plot out a density map,
first ensure that you have a set of points on your data set with X or Y coordinates,
or latitude and longitude.
Upload that data set into Tableau,
and plot out longitude as a dimension in the column.
Likewise, plot out latitude as a dimension in a row.
Now, ensure a symbol map is selected as
the visualization and that we're using density as the mark.
You could format map styling through clicking on the map dropdown on
your OS menu bar and style it accordingly to your preferences.
You can also include map layers by clicking on map layers.
From there, Tableau provides pre-loaded layers out of
the box depending on what you need to analyze against,
from postal codes, to neighborhoods,
cities, even physical road infrastructure.
So by default, you are including the entire data set in your analysis.
But you could add as many filters as you
need so that you can focus on geospatial patterns of different segments.
Here, we're adding Pickup Datetime as a filter,
filtering on hours and limiting our filter to only times during rush hour.
Let's jump on to a hands-on exercise.